(DOCSP-10991): add Mongo() and scripting docs (#24)
mongodb/docs-mongodb-shell: source/write-scripts.txt

.. _mdb-shell-write-scripts:

=======================================
Write Scripts for the {+mdb-shell+}
=======================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

You can write scripts for the {+mdb-shell+} that manipulate data in
MongoDB or perform administrative operations.

This tutorial provides an introduction to writing JavaScript that uses 
the {+mdb-shell+} shell to access MongoDB.

.. _mdb-shell-open-new-connections-in-shell:

> Open A New Connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a New Connection
```

---------------------

From the {+mdb-shell+} or from a JavaScript file, you can instantiate
database connections using the :method:`Mongo()` method:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: false

   new Mongo()
   new Mongo(<host>)
   new Mongo(<host:port>)

.. note::

   The {+mdb-shell+} does not support the
   ``ClientSideFieldLevelEncryptionOptions`` parameter with the
   :method:`Mongo()` method.

Consider the following example that instantiates a new connection to the
MongoDB instance running on localhost on the default port and sets the
global ``db`` variable to ``myDatabase`` using the :method:`getDB()`

> method:

Author: updated

.. code-block:: javascript

   conn = Mongo();
   db = conn.getDB("myDatabase");

If connecting to a MongoDB instance that enforces access control, you
must include the credentials in the :manual:`connection string
</reference/connection-string/>`. The following example shows you how
to connect to a MongoDB instance running on ``localhost`` on the default

> port secured using :manual:`SCRAM </core/security-scram/>`:

Author: updated

.. code-block:: javascript

   conn = Mongo("mongodb://<username>:<password>@localhost:27017");

.. the manual page says to use db.auth(), which isn't implemented yet.
   this is the only way I could get it to work.
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#opening-new-connections

.. include:: /includes/admonitions/note-redact-credentials-command-history.rst

> Additionally, you can use the :method:`connect()` method to connect to

Author: I think this is a platform bug. following up. I can work around it if I need to.

> Additionally, you can use the :method:`connect()` method to connect to

Author: went with the workaround because the server manual does not use :method: to link to this for some reason, so it's probably not a nextgen bug.

the MongoDB instance. The following example connects to the MongoDB
instance that is running on ``localhost`` with the non-default port

> ``27020`` and sets the global ``db`` variable:

Author: updated

.. code-block:: javascript

   db = connect("localhost:27020/myDatabase");

.. skipping the Differences Between Interactive and Scripted mongo
   section as most of the javascript equivalents to the shell helpers
   have not yet been implemented in mongosh -- revisit later
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#differences-between-interactive-and-scripted-mongo

.. also skippping --eval section as I'm having issues getting it to work
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#eval-option

Execute a JavaScript File
-------------------------

> You can execute a ``.js`` file from within the {+mdb-shell+} shell,

Author: updataed

> using the ``.load`` command, as in the following: 

Author: updated

.. code-block:: javascript

   .load myjstest.js

This command loads and executes the ``myjstest.js`` file.

The ``.load`` command accepts relative and absolute paths. If the

> current working directory of the {+mdb-shell+} shell is ``/data/db``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
current working directory of {+mdb-shell+} is ``/data/db``,
```

Author: updated

and ``myjstest.js`` resides in the ``/data/db/scripts`` directory, then

> the following calls within the mongo shell would be equivalent: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following calls within {+mdb-shell+} are equivalent: 
```

Author: updated

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: false

   .load scripts/myjstest.js
   .load /data/db/scripts/myjstest.js

.. note::

>    There is no search path for the .load command. If the desired script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   There is no search path for the ``.load`` command. If the desired script
```

Author: updated

   is not in the current working directory or the full specified path,

>    the {+mdb-shell+} will not be able to access the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   {+mdb-shell+} cannot access the file.
```

Author: updated

Open a New Connection
---------------------

From the |mdb-shell| or from a JavaScript file, you can instantiate
database connections using the :method:`Mongo()` method:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: false

   new Mongo()
   new Mongo(<host>)
   new Mongo(<host:port>)

.. note::

   The |mdb-shell| does not support the
   :manual:`ClientSideFieldLevelEncryptionOptions
   </reference/method/Mongo/#clientsidefieldlevelencryptionoptions>`
   document with the :method:`Mongo()` method.

Consider a MongoDB instance running on localhost on the default port.
The following example:

- Instantiates a new connection to the instance, and
- Sets the global ``db`` variable to ``myDatabase`` using the
  :method:`getDB()` method. 

.. code-block:: javascript

   conn = Mongo();
   db = conn.getDB("myDatabase");

If you connect to a MongoDB instance that enforces access control, you
must include the credentials in the :manual:`connection string
</reference/connection-string/>`. The following example connects to a
MongoDB instance that is:

- Running on ``localhost`` on the default port, and
- Secured using :manual:`SCRAM </core/security-scram/>`.

.. code-block:: javascript

>    conn = Mongo("mongodb://<username>:<password>@localhost:27017");

Reviewer 2: I would potentially add the auth DB to the URI, so "mongodb://<username>:<password>@localhost:27017/<authDB>" because it could be confusing if authentication fails due to the DB not being set

Author: updated

.. the manual page says to use db.auth(), which isn't implemented yet.
   this is the only way I could get it to work.
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#opening-new-connections

.. include:: /includes/admonitions/note-redact-credentials-command-history.rst

Additionally, you can use the :manual:`connect()
</reference/method/connect/>` method to connect to the MongoDB instance.
The following example:

- Connects to the MongoDB instance that is running on ``localhost`` with
  the non-default port ``27020``, and 
- Sets the global ``db`` variable.

.. code-block:: javascript

   db = connect("localhost:27020/myDatabase");

.. skipping the Differences Between Interactive and Scripted mongo
   section as most of the javascript equivalents to the shell helpers
   have not yet been implemented in mongosh -- revisit later
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#differences-between-interactive-and-scripted-mongo

.. also skippping --eval section as I'm having issues getting it to work
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#eval-option

> Execute a JavaScript File

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if you have this anywhere else in the docs, but you can also load js files with regular `require`. It won't execute, but will make everything exported there in scope.

More concretely, all of these are possible:
```js
require('./cats') // local file in the cwd
require('thunkify') // if you have this module in your cwd node_modules this will work as well
// and more conveniently perhaps this as well
var cats = require('./cats')
var thunkify = require('thunkify') // from cwd node_modules
```

Up to y'all to decide whether you think this will be useful to add to the docs!

Author: added

.. _mdb-shell-write-scripts:

=======================================
Write Scripts for {+mdb-shell+}
=======================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

> You can write scripts for the MongoDB Shell that manipulate data in

Reviewer: Source constant?
```suggestion
You can write scripts for the {+mdb-shell+} that manipulate data in
```

Author: replaced with substitution in write-scripts.txt and connect.txt

MongoDB or perform administrative operations.

> This tutorial introduces using the MongoDB Shell with JavaScript to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial introduces using the {+mdb-shell+} with JavaScript to
```

access MongoDB.

.. _mdb-shell-open-new-connections-in-shell:

Open a New Connection
---------------------

> From the MongoDB shell or from a JavaScript file, you can instantiate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the {+mdb-shell+} or from a JavaScript file, you can instantiate
```

database connections using the :method:`Mongo()` method:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: false

   new Mongo()
   new Mongo(<host>)
   new Mongo(<host:port>)

.. note::

   {+mdb-shell+} does not support the
   :manual:`ClientSideFieldLevelEncryptionOptions
   </reference/method/Mongo/#clientsidefieldlevelencryptionoptions>`
   document with the :method:`Mongo()` method.

Consider a MongoDB instance running on localhost on the default port.
The following example:

- Instantiates a new connection to the instance, and
- Sets the global ``db`` variable to ``myDatabase`` using the
  :method:`getDB()` method. 

.. code-block:: javascript

   conn = Mongo();
   db = conn.getDB("myDatabase");

If you connect to a MongoDB instance that enforces access control, you
must include the credentials in the :manual:`connection string
</reference/connection-string/>`. The following example connects to a
MongoDB instance that is:

- Running on ``localhost`` on the default port, and

> - secured using :manual:`SCRAM </core/security-scram/>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Secured using :manual:`SCRAM </core/security-scram/>`.
```

Author: updated

.. include:: /includes/admonitions/note-redact-credentials-command-history.rst

Additionally, you can use the :method:`connect()` method to connect to
the MongoDB instance. The following example:

- Connects to the MongoDB instance that is running on ``localhost`` with
  the non-default port ``27020``, and 
- Sets the global ``db`` variable.

.. code-block:: javascript

   db = connect("localhost:27020/myDatabase");

.. skipping the Differences Between Interactive and Scripted mongo
   section as most of the javascript equivalents to the shell helpers
   have not yet been implemented in mongosh -- revisit later
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#differences-between-interactive-and-scripted-mongo

.. also skippping --eval section as I'm having issues getting it to work
   https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/write-scripts-for-the-mongo-shell/#eval-option

Execute a JavaScript File
-------------------------

You can execute a ``.js`` file from within the MongoDB shell
using the ``.load`` command. The following command loads and executes
the ``myjstest.js`` file:

.. code-block:: javascript

   .load myjstest.js

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: updated

The ``.load`` command accepts relative and absolute paths. If the

> current working directory of the MongoDB shell is ``/data/db``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
current working directory of the {+mdb-shell+} is ``/data/db``,
```

and ``myjstest.js`` resides in the ``/data/db/scripts`` directory, then

> the following calls within the MongoDB shell are equivalent: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following calls within the {+mdb-shell+} are equivalent: 
```

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: false

   .load scripts/myjstest.js
   .load /data/db/scripts/myjstest.js

.. note::

   There is no search path for the ``.load`` command. If the desired
   script is not in the current working directory or the full specified

>    path, the MongoDB shell cannot access the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   path, the {+mdb-shell+} cannot access the file.
```
